# Week 9
In this week, we take a look at exceptions and I/O opterations, which are not purely functional. 

## Exceptions
The concept of exceptions is similar to that of **object-oriented programming(OO)**. In actual implementation, 
they are created as a datatype with constructors. 

```ocaml
failwith "todo";;
Exception: Failure "todo"

End_of_file;;
exn = End_of_file

(*two examples with utop output*)
```
To handle an exception, it is just the traditional **try-catch** structure. The difference is that,
we don't have a keyword for *catch* but just a normal pattern matching.
```ocaml
try 
  your_body 
with 
  | pattern1 -> _ | pattern2 -> _ | ... 
```

## I/O operations
I/O operations are not purely functional. Thus, they are realized not using the functional way, 
but using **side-effects**. 
```ocaml
output_string;;
out_channel -> string -> unit = <fun>;;

read_line;;
unit -> string = <fun>
```
Here the unit shows that the inputs and outputs are somes irrelevant for these functions. It is 
also where the concept side-effects come from. 

## Write or read in a file
What is the process of performing I/O operations?
1. open the file 
```ocaml
open_out, open_in, ...
```
2. read/write
```ocaml
output_string, readline, print_char, ...
```
3. close the file
```ocaml
close_out, close_in, ...
```

## Exercise 2
```ocaml
let x = print_endline "foo" in x, x
let x () = print_endline "foo" in x (), x ()
```
Discuss and answer the following questions.
1. What are side-effects? Give some examples. <br>
>!Effects of functions that are not shown by input or outputs. Best examples are just I/O operations!<
2. What are pure functions? What are their benefits? <br>
>!Functions without side effects.!< <br>
**Benefits**: 
 - Reproducible results facilitate testing
 - Parallelization (no interaction between different calls) 
 - Memoization (we can save the result for some input and don't need to compute it again)
 - On-demand/lazy evaluation (if there are no side-effects, we only need to evaluate some function if we depend on its value) 
3. Why does delaying evaluation only make sense in case of side-effects or in presence of non-terminating expressions? <br>
>!The outputs are deterministic. It makes no sense to do delaying evaluations.!<
4. Why do we want to use () instead of some unused variable or the discard _? <br>
>!Simpilicity, Avoiding Misunderstanding!<

## Exercise 1
 ### store_db. 
 First, we print the overhead of each student
 ```quote 
 first_name;last_name;id;semester;grade_count\n
 ```
 where **grade_count** counts the total number of grades available of this student. <br>
 Then, print each grade in a new line.
 ```quote 
 course;grade\n
 ```
 ### load_db. 
 When should we throw an exception?
 1. When the format of the header is not correct. This includes
   - When there is less or more arguments
   - When the type of the arguments are not correct
 2. When the format of the course-grade list is not correct. This includes
   - When the types of course and grade are not correct
   - When the length of course-grade and the length given in the overhead are not equivalent.

## Other opportunity: Printf, Scanf modules, see in Ocaml library.
 
